
The ENVRI Reference Model, hosted at www.envri.eu/rm, exists to illustrate common 
characteristics of environmental science research infrastructures in order to provide a 
common language and understanding, promote technology and solution sharing and 
improve interoperability. This guideline document has been created to guide users of the 
ENVRI Reference Model to explore the model and help them understand the concepts 
defined, so as to better apply the model to daily practices. 

 

Copyright © Members of the ENVRI Collaboration, 2013. See www.ENVRI.eu for details of 
the ENVRI project and the collaboration. ENVRI (ÒCommon Operations of Environmental 
Research InfrastructuresÓ) is a project co-funded by the European Commission as a 
Coordination and Support Action within the 7th Framework Programme. ENVRI began in 
October 2011 and will run for 3 years. This work is licensed under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-Noncommercial 3.0 License. To view a copy of this license, visit 
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/ or send a letter to Creative Commons, 171 
Second Street, Suite 300, San Francisco, California, 94105, and USA. The work must be 
attributed by attaching the following reference to the copied elements: ÒCopyright © Members 
of the ENVRI Collaboration, 2011. See www.ENVRI.eu for details of the ENVRI project and 
the collaborationÓ. Using this document in a way and/or for purposes not foreseen in the 
license, requires the prior written permission of the copyright holders. The information 
contained in this document represents the views of the copyright holders as of the date such 
views are published. 



This document is a formal deliverable for the European Commission, applicable to all 
members of the ENVRI project, beneficiaries and Joint Research Unit members, as well as 
its collaborating projects. 


Frontier environmental research increasingly depends on a wide range of data and advanced 
capabilities to process and analyse them. The ENVRI project, ÒCommon Operations of 
Environmental Research infrastructuresÓ is a collaboration in the ESFRI Environment 
Cluster, with support from ICT experts, to develop common e-science components and 
services for their facilities. The results will speed up the construction of these infrastructures 
and will allow scientists to use the data and software from each facility to enable multi-
disciplinary science. 

 

The target is on developing common capabilities including software and services of the 
environmental e-infrastructure communities. While the ENVRI infrastructures are very 
diverse, they face common challenges including data capture from distributed sensors, 
metadata standardisation, management of high volume data, workflow execution and data 
visualisation. The common standards, deployable services and tools developed will be 
adopted by each infrastructure as it progresses through its construction phase. 

 

The project will be based on a common reference model created by capturing the semantic 
resources of each ESFRI-ENV infrastructure. This model and the development driven by the 
test-bed deployments result in ready-to-use systems which can be integrated into the 
environmental research infrastructures. 

 

The project puts emphasis on synergy between advanced developments, not only among the 
infrastructure facilities, but also with ICT providers and related e-science initiatives. These links will facilitate system deployment and the training of future researchers, and ensure that the inter-disciplinary capabilities established here remain sustainable beyond the lifetime of the project. 

 


The ENVRI Reference Model provides the ESFRI Environmental Research Infrastructures 
with a common ontological framework and standards for the description and characterisation 
of computational and storage infrastructures in order to achieve seamless interoperability 
between the heterogeneous resources of different infrastructures. 

 

This guideline is prepared to help Reference Model users to understand key model concepts 
and map the abstraction to concretions. It uses a set of practical examples to illustrate 
various ways of the ENVRI Reference Model. The intention is to provide users with a way of 
thinking, which may lead to exploration of the model itself and inspire the discovery of 
various way of using the model. 

 

Using a number of examples, we will show that the Reference Model can benefit a ESFRI 
Environmental Research with: 

. A set of ready-to-use terminology with a publicly-accessible reference base, which can 
be used to describe requirements and architectural features of an infrastructure, and 
serve as a common language in communication materials; in particular, with an external 
community without any specific knowledge of the scientific domain being addressed. 
. A uniform framework with well-defined subsystems of components specified from 
different complementary viewpoints (Science, Information and Computation), which 
promotes structural thinking in constructions of system architectures, and can be used as 
a research tool for comparison and analysis of heterogeneous infrastructures. 
. A knowledge base capturing existing requirements and state-of-the-art design 
experiences. The information provided can be referred to in various system analysis 
tasks, to guide design and implementation activities, and to drive the development of 
common services. 




The development of the ENVRI Reference Model, hosted at www.envri.eu/rm, provides the 
ESFRI Environmental Research Infrastructures (ESFRI ENV RIs) with a common ontological 
framework for description and characterisation of computational and storage infrastructures, 
and provides them a community standard to help achieve greater levels of interoperability 
between their heterogeneous resources. 

 

The Reference Model defines a conceptual model that captures computational requirements 
and state-of-the-art design experiences. In a sense, the model reveals a snapshot of the 
existing landscape of the ESFRI environmental science research infrastructures at a high 
level of abstraction. 

 

In order to help Reference Model users map the abstraction to concretions, so as to better 
apply the knowledge in their daily practices, we prepare this guideline that introduces our 
own experiments with the Reference Model, and in doing so reveal the principles of usage. 
These principles are neither bound nor enforced. They are not mandatory for users to follow. 
The intention is to provide users with a way of thinking, which may lead to exploration of the 
model itself and inspire the discovery of various way of using the model. 

 

Rather than going through each model term and explaining the meaning of it, we use a set of 
practical examples, each of them illustrating some aspects of the usage of the reference 
model as well as introducing a number of model concepts. 

 

Initially, examples are selected with the aim to serve the primary audience1 within the 
community of ESFRI ENV RIs. We use scenarios that are familiar to our users, and include 
information that may be of interest to the community and perhaps benefit their work. 

See the Intended Audience of the Reference Model at: http://tinyurl.com/ksjmjzq 

 

To collect these examples, we used a template with 5 questions: 

1. What is this use case about? Describe the purpose of the use case, and any 
background information. 
2. How can the reference model be used in this use case? 
3. What are the results of using the reference model? Evidence of usefulness/utility. 
4. What are the benefits of using the reference model? Demonstrate specific cases of 
things that could not have been achieved without the Reference Model. 
5. Are there any problems with using the reference model in this use case? Feedback 
from users. 


 

These questions proved to be helpful in organising investigation activities. We encourage 
readers also to use this template to structure newly developed stories and share them with 
us so as to inspire others. 

 


With limited resources, only a few examples are included; these will be extended when more 
resources are available for future investigations. 

 

The rest of the document is arranged as follows: we firstly revisit the key concepts of the 
Reference Model in Section 2, then introduce a set of examples in Section 3, and we 
summarise our work in Section 4. 


The ENVRI Reference Model (ENVRI-RM) is built using the Open Distributed Processing 
(ODP) framework, an international standard for distributed system specification published by 
ISO/IEC (ISO/IEC 10746-1, 1998). ODP provides an overall conceptual framework for 
specifying large or complex computing systems. It adopts the object modelling approach, 
and defines five specific viewpoints Ð abstractions that yield specifications of the whole 
system related to particular sets of concerns. The five viewpoints are: 

. The Enterprise Viewpoint, which concerns the organisational situation in which business 
(research activity in the current case) is to take place. For better communication with the 
environmental science community, we refer to this in the ENVRI-RM as the Science 
Viewpoint. 
. The Information Viewpoint, which concerns modelling of the shared information 
manipulated within the system of interest. 
. The Computational Viewpoint, which concerns the design of the analytical, modelling 
and simulation processes and applications provided by the system. 
. The Engineering Viewpoint, which tackles the problems of diversity in infrastructure 
provision; it gives the prescriptions for supporting the necessary abstract computational 
interactions in a range of different concrete situations. 
. The Technology Viewpoint, which concerns real-world constraints (such as restrictions 
on the facilities and technologies available to implement the system) applied to the 
existing computing platforms on which the computational processes must execute. 


The reasons for adopting ODP in ENVRI include: 

. It provides a descriptive framework for specifying and building large or complex system 
that consist of a set of guiding concepts and terminology. This provides a way of thinking 
about architectural issues in terms of fundamental patterns or organising principles; 
. It enables large collaborative design activities. ODP breaks down a complex design 
specification into separated but interlined viewpoints, which allows designers in different 
teams from different organisations to work in parallel and to deliver uniform 
specifications; 
. There is a natural fit between the ODP viewpoints and interoperability requirements in e-
science (Zhao 2012). 
. Being an international standard, ODP offers authority and stability. 


 

In the next subsection, we revisit key contents of the model, which are described using the ODP terms and concepts. 



The development of the reference model is based on a preliminary study of a collection of 
the representative environmental research infrastructures (Chen 2013). By examining their 
computational characteristics, 5 common subsystems2 have been identified: Data 
Acquisition, Data Curation, Data Access, Data Processing and Community 
Support. The fundamental reason of the division of the 5 subsystems is based on the 
observation that all applications, services and software tools are designed and implemented 
around 5 major physical resources: the sensor network, the storage, the (internet) 
communication network, application servers and client devices. The definitions of the five 
subsystems are given below: 

2 Here, we define subsystem as a set of capabilities that collectively are defined by a set of interfaces 
with corresponding operations that can be invoked by other subsystems. An interface in ODP is an 
abstraction of the behaviour of an object that consists of a subset of the interactions of that object 
together with a set of constraints on when they may occur (Linington 2012). 

. Data acquisition: collects raw data from sensor arrays, various instruments, or human 
observers, and brings the measurements (data streams) into the system. 
. Data curation: facilitates quality control and preservation of scientific data. It is typically 
operated at a data centre. 
. Data access: enables discovery and retrieval of data housed in data resources 
managed by a data curation subsystem. 
. Data processing: aggregates the data from various resources and provides 
computational capabilities and capacities for conducting data analysis and scientific 
experiments. 
. Community support: manages, controls and tracks users' activities and supports users 
to conduct their roles in communities. 


Amongst the five subsystems can be identified seven major points-of-reference wherein 
interfaces between subsystems can be implemented. These points-of-reference are as 
follows: 

1) Acquisition/Curation by which the collection of raw data is managed. 
2) Curation/Access by which the retrieval of curated data products is arranged. 
3) Acquisition/Access by which the collection of raw data and the status of the 
observation network can be accessed and monitored externally. 
4) Curation/Processing by which analyses of curated data is coordinated. 
5) Acquisition/Processing by which acquisition events are listened for and responded to. 
6) Processing/Access by which data processes are scheduled and reported. 
7) Community/All by which the outside world interacts with the infrastructure in many 
different roles. 


Depending on the distribution of resources in an implemented infrastructure, some of these 
reference points may not be present in the infrastructure. They take particular importance 
however when considering scenarios where a research infrastructure delegates subsystems 
to other client infrastructures. For example, EPOS3 and LifeWatch4 both delegate data 
acquisition and some data curation activities to client national or domain-specific 
infrastructures, but provide data processing services over the data held by those client 
infrastructures. Thus reference points 4 and 5 become of significant importance to the 
construction of those projects. 
 

Analysis of the common requirements of the six ESFRI ENV RIs has resulted in the 
identification of a number of common functionalities. As shown in Figure 2.2, these 
functionalities can be partitioned amongst the five subsystems. They encompass a range of 
concerns, from the fundamental (e.g. data collection and storage, data discovery and access 
and data security) to more specific challenges (e.g. data versioning, instrument monitoring 
and interactive visualisation). 



In order to better manage the range of requirements, and in order to ensure rapid publication 
of incremental refinements to the ENVRI-RM, a minimal model has been identified which 
describes the fundamental functionality necessary to describe a functional environmental 
research infrastructure. The minimal model focuses on the major interaction links from raw 
data acquisition to the access and export of specific curated datasets, passing through 
stages of curation, brokering and authorisation. This core interaction chain represents the 
most fundamental contract between the archetypical research infrastructure and its 
community -- the access to scientific observations/measurements. The core interactions 
between data curation and data processing, as well as uploading of contributions from 
outside the infrastructure are also present in the minimal model, providing the skeleton by 
which additional extensions to the reference model can be attached, including alternative 
mechanisms for data retrieval and presentation. By initially focusing on this minimal model, it 


then becomes practical to produce a partial specification of the ENVRI-RM which 
nonetheless reflects the final shape of the ENVRI-RM without the need for significant 
refactoring. Further development of the ENVRI-RM will focus on designated priority areas 
based on feedback from the contributing ESFRI representatives. 

 

 The definitions of the functionalities are given at the reference model wiki site: http://miniurl.com/92Mz. 

 


The ENVRI-RM subsystems are specified using the ODP standard framework. The ENVRI-
RM defines an ÔarchetypicalÕ environmental research infrastructure rather than a specific 
(implemented) infrastructure. Three viewpoints take particular priority: the Science, 
Information and Computational Viewpoints, which gives better focus on the core objective of 
ENVRI: to develop an understanding of the common requirements and to provide the design 
solutions for common data and operation services. 


The Science Viewpoint of the ENVRI-RM intends to capture the requirements for an 
environmental research infrastructure from the perspective of the people who perform their 
tasks and achieve their goals as mediated by the infrastructure. The key concepts defined in 
this viewpoint include communities and their roles and behaviours. 5 common 
communities are specified in according to the 5 subsystems: data acquisition, data 
curation, data publication, data service provision, and data usage. The definition of the 
communities are based on community objectives: 

. Data Acquisition Community, who collect raw data and bring (streams of) 
measurements into an infrastructure; 
. Data Curation Community, who curate the scientific data, maintain and archive them, 
and produce various data products with metadata; 
. Data Publication Community, who assist data publication, discovery and access; 
. Data Service Provision Community, who provide various services, applications and 
software/tools to link and recombine data and information in order to derive knowledge; 
. Data Usage Community, who make use of data and service products, and transfer 
knowledge into understanding. 


By analysing common requirements, use scenarios for each community are derived, 
community roles and behaviours are identified6. 

6 The definitions of these concepts can be found at www.envri.eu/rm. 

2.2.2 Information Viewpoint 

The Information Viewpoint provides a common abstract model for the shared information 
handled by the infrastructure. The focus lies on the information itself, without considering any 
platform-specific or implementation details. It is independent from the computational 
interfaces and functions that manipulate the information or the nature of technology used to 
store it. It specifies the types of the information objects and the relationships between those 
types and how the states of these objects change as results of computational operations. 

 

Modelling in this viewpoint in the ENVRI context employs a data-oriented approach which 
follows the lifecycle of scientific data (from raw to published and processed data) as 
information objects in each subsystem identifying their behaviour changes when events or 
action occur. The model captures common issues challenging many environmental research 
infrastructures such as, data enrichment including attribution of unique identifiers necessary 
for unambiguous identification and tracking of data provenance, association of metadata, 
semantic annotation, quality assessment, semantic mapping, and data discovery. The model 


has been continuously refined by examining the feasibility of implementations and applying 
community feedback. 

 

The resulting model consists of a set of information objects managed and processed by the 
common subsystems, a set of action types which are events that cause the states changes 
of the information objects, and a set of constraints on these objects. The model also specifies 
the static schemata and the dynamic schemata. The static schemata defines 
instantaneous views of the information objects at a certain stage of the data lifecycle defining 
a minimum set of constraints for data sharing. On the other hand, the dynamic schemata 
captures how the information object evolve as the system operates, specifying the allowable 
state changes as the effects of the actions. For example, Figure 2.3 shows a simple 
dynamic schemata, which specifies allowable states (represented by boxes) of an 
information object after applying certain actions types (represented by arrows between 
states). 

 

The Computational Viewpoint of the ENVRI-RM accounts for the major computational 
objects expected within an environmental research infrastructure and the interfaces by which 
they interact. Each object encapsulates functionality implemented by a service or resource 
within the infrastructure. This encapsulation occurs at the conceptual level rather than the 
implementation level; it is admissible for the functions of a given object to be distributed 
across multiple computational resources in an implemented infrastructure, should that suit 
the infrastructureÕs physical architecture. Each object provides a number of interfaces by 
which functions can be invoked on the object, or by which the object can invoke the functions 
of other objects. By linking client and server interfaces, a network of interactions between 
objects can be built that demonstrates the computational dependencies of different parts of 
an infrastructure. These bindings can then be further specified in order to determine the 
particular operations and information streams supported by the interaction between 
interfaces, as well as the information objects that must be present. 

 

 

Figure 2.4: An example of interactions between interfaces of computational objects. 
Operations are represented by ball-and-socket connections; the client provides the socket 
while the server provides the ball. Data streams are represented by thick dashed lines in the 
direction of the data-flow. 

For example a (simplified) brokered upload interaction might take the form illustrated in 
Figure 2.4. Four computational objects are identified: the science gateway encapsulating 
user-afforded functionality; the data import service handling import requests into the 
infrastructure; an internal data store controller managing access to a particular data store in 
the infrastructure; and an external data source controller from which data is to be extracted. 
In this instance, the data import service manages access via its import data and 
coordinate data import operational interfaces, responding to a request from the science 
gateway and invoking a selected data store respectively; this exchange of requests between 
objects can be further specified using, for example, a suitable UML sequence diagram. Once 
the data transfer has been validated and configured, the data can be pulled from the data 
source to the data store via compatible stream interfaces. 

 

Each of the five essential subsystems of the ENVRI-RM must provide a number of 
computational objects of the kind illustrated above to be distributed across an infrastructure's 
technical architecture. For each of those objects, suitable interfaces must be identified and 
the most important interactions between those interfaces described. In the ENVRI-RM, the 


interfaces between subsystems are given particular attention, as many critical functions 
intercede in the movement of data between subsystems. 

 

 

Figure 2.5: A subset of the core interactions involved in the acquisition and access of data. Using the notation of Figure 2.3, as observed in the majority of studied cases. The chains of bindings between objects indicate the intermediaries involved in interactions between objects in different subsystems. 

 

Figure 2.5 illustrates the computational objects involved in basic data acquisition, curation and access, positioned with respect to four of the five research infrastructure subsystems. Client/server interface labels have been merged for clarity. Multi-party interactions are coordinated via binding objects7 (such as raw data collection and brokered data export) 
that serve to simplify such interactions by abstracting aside implementation-specific details of 
the coordination such as how information and control is passed between objects when three 
or more parties are involved. 

7 A binding object is an ODP computational object, which supports a binding between a set of other 
computational objects (Linington 2012). 

 

Thus the archetypical research infrastructure is considered here as having a brokered, 
service-oriented architecture. Core functionality is encapsulated in a number of service 
objects that control various resources present in the infrastructure. Access to most of these 
services by external entities is overseen by various brokers that validate requests and 
provide an interoperability layer between heterogeneous components --- this is particularly 
important for federated infrastructures, which may not be able to enforce a core set of 
standards on all data and services being integrated. 


The section review the ENVRI Reference Model which exists to illustrate common 
characteristics of environmental sciences research infrastructures and establishes a 
taxonomy of terms, concepts and definitions in order to provide a common language and 
understanding, promote technology and solution sharing and improve interoperability. 


The ENVRI Reference Model is a work in progress. Currently, attention is focused on three 
of the five ODP viewpoints: science (enterprise), information and computational. The 
remaining viewpoints of engineering and technology have been deferred to a later date. 

 

In the next section, we use a set of practical examples to illustrate the usage of the 
Reference Model. 




A collection of examples demonstrating usage of the ENVRI Reference Model is given 
below. Different examples may serve different purposes. Some of them merely illustrate a 
different way of using the reference model (e.g., Example 4), while others also intend to 
introduce model concepts where many terms are highlighted with clickable links. Please click 
those highlighted concepts that will re-locate you to the related definitions and specifications 
in the Reference Model. 

Be sure to go through all terms marked with -- some of them, though repeated, will 
guide you to a different part of the model. By visiting all linked contents, you will have 
explored 90% of the most important model content. (Note, terms marked with are 
also model concepts which link to content you might have visited before.) (lightbulb)
(grey lightbulb)


This example explains the usage of the Reference Model in a pilot project that investigates 
the big data strategies for the EISCAT 3D research infrastructure. The Reference Model 
serves as a knowledge base to guide various research activities. 

 

EISCAT, the European Incoherent Scatter Scientific Association, was established to conduct 
research on the lower, middle and upper atmosphere and ionosphere using the incoherent 
scatter radar technique. This technique is the most powerful ground-based tool for these 
research applications. A next generation incoherent scatter radar system, EISCAT 3D, is 
being designed. The multi-static radars to be used will be a tool to carry out plasma physics 
experiments in the natural environment, a novel atmospheric monitoring instrument for 
climate and space weather studies, and an essential element in multi-instrument campaigns 
to study the polar ionosphere and magnetosphere. It will be a world-leading international 
research infrastructure, using the incoherent scatter technique to study how the Earth's 
atmosphere is coupled to space. 

 

The design of the EISCAT 3D opens up opportunities for physicists to explore many new 
research fields. On the other hand, it also introduces significant challenges in handling large-
scale experimental data that will be massively generated at great speeds and volumes. 
During its first operation stage in 2018, EISCAT 3D will produce 5PB data per year, and the 
total data volume will rise up to 40PB per year in its full operations stage in 2023. This 
challenge is typically referred to as a big data problem and requires solutions beyond the 
capabilities of conventional database technologies. 

 

EISCAT is currently considering the use of e-Science technologies to deliver strategies for 
handling its big data products. Advanced e-Science infrastructure projects such as EGI8, 


PRACE9, and their enabling technologies are making large-scale computational capacities 
more accessible to researchers of all scientific disciplines. Emerging infrastructures, such as 
cloud systems proposed by the Helix Nebula project10 and by the EGI Federated Cloud Task 
Force11, or the data infrastructure to be provided by EUDAT12 will extend possibilities even 
further. 

 

As a potential of e-science partner for EISCAT, we present EGI. EGI was established in 2010 
as a Europe-wide federation of national computing and storage resources. The EGI 
collaboration is coordinated by EGI.eu, a not-for-profit foundation created to manage the 
infrastructure on behalf of its participants: National Grid Initiatives and European 
Intergovernmental Research Organisations. Resources in EGI are provided by about 350 
resource centres from the NGIs who are distributed across 55 countries in Europe, the Asia-Pacific region, Canada and Latin America. These providers operate more than 370,000 
logical CPUs, 248 PB disk and 176 PB of disk capacity13 to drive research and innovation in Europe and beyond. 

 

Since February 2013, a pilot project has been set up within ENVRI, which establishes a 
partnership between EISCAT and EGI, aiming to identify and allocate solutions that directly benefit EISCAT 3D, which can also be reused in other ESFRI projects involved in ENVRI. 
ENVRI WP3 has been involved in this investigation, and uses the Reference Model to guide 
various research activities, including; 

. Analysis of the EISCAT 3D data infrastructure; 
. Analysis of EGI enabling services and construction of an integrated infrastructure; 
. Identifying the gaps between the EGI generic service infrastructure with the functional 
requirements of the domain specific research infrastructure, EISCAT 3D. 


Having fulfilled these tasks, the Reference Model is proving to be useful as a knowledge 
base that can be referred when conducting various system analysis and design activities. 

In the following, we describe how the Reference Model is used to conduct several system 
analysis tasks. 


The initial challenge for the pilot project is to understand the EISCAT 3D data infrastructure. 
The existing design documents of EISCAT 3D has been focused on the incoherent scatter 
radar technologies. As shown in Figure 3.1, its data infrastructure is embedded within the 
overall design of the observatory system that is difficult for a computer scientist/technologist 
having little physics knowledge background to understand. 



Figure 3.2: The EISCAT 3D data infrastructure maps to 2 of 5 ENVRI common subsystems. 
Using the 5 ENVRI Common Subsystem to interpret the EISCAT 3D data infrastructure 
makes it easy to communicate with computer scientists/technologists. 


We use the 5 ENVRI common subsystem framework to decompose the computational 
elements, clarifying the boundary between the radar network and data infrastructure, which 
results in Figure 3.2. This diagram now, instead of Figure 3.1, is frequently used in 
presentations and discussions of the EISCAT 3D data infrastructure. (lightbulb)


 

Figure 3.2 illustrates that the EISCAT 3D functional components can be placed into 2 ENVRI 
common subsystems, data acquisition and curation. Briefly, at the acquisition 
subsystem, the raw signal voltage data will be generated by the antenna Receivers at the 
speed of 125 TB/hr, and be temporarily stored in a Ring buffer. A second stream of RF signal 
voltages will be passed to a Beam-former to generate the beam-formed data (1MHz). 
Continually, the beam-formed data will be processed by a Correlator to generate correlation analysis data based on standard methods. Then, the correlation data will be delivered to a Fitter to produce the fitted data (1GB/year). In order to support different user requirements, EISCAT 3D will allow users to access and process the raw voltage data in the Ring buffer and to generate the specialised products based on self-defined analysis algorithms. Both raw data and their products will be stored in Intermediate storage (11PB/year), from where they will be delivered to the central site within the curation subsystem.

 

In the curation subsystem, Long-Term Storage will preserve the raw voltage data and their 
products. A High Performance Computer will be used for data searching and processing 
(e.g., beam forming, lag profiling or other correlation, and parameter fitting). Searching 
facilities will enable user to search over all data products and to identify significant data signatures. A Multi-static fitter will be installed to process the stored raw voltage data to generate the 3D plasma parameters that will then be stored back in Long-Term Storage. A complete copy of Long-Term Storage data will be established at mirror sites; related data processing and searching tools will be provided. 

 

While it is made clear that the design specification covers 2 of 5 common subsystems 
described in the ENVRI Reference Model (including, acquisition and curation), we 
understand functionalities of the other 3 subsystems ( access, processing, and 
community support) are currently missing. The reason of this is likely due to resource 
limitations. However, the absent 3 subsystems are crucial for a big data system such as 
EISCAT 3D. Without providing services to support data discovery, access, processing and 
user community, the value of EISCAT 3D big data cannot be unlocked, and expensively 
generated and archived scientific data will be useless.


 

Using the Reference Model as the analysis tool, we identified the missing pieces of the 
design specification, which gives the direction for future investigation. 

 

. Analysis of EGI Enabling Services and Construction of an Integrated Infrastructure 


We need to understand the functionalities of EGI services and how to integrate them to 
support the EISCAT 3D requirements. 

 



Showing in Table 3.1, by examining the functionalities of the EGI services and mapping them to the ENVRI Reference Model computational model objects, we understand these services fall into 2 ENVRI common subsystems: Curation and Community Support. 

 

Above analysis gives clues to a solution for integrating the EGI technologies into the EISCAT 3D data infrastructure. Depicted in Figure 3.3, a secondary data curation subsystem 
(seen as the mirror site of the EISCAT 3D central archive in Figure 3.2) can be established using the EGI infrastructure and its services. Data from EISCAT 3D central archive (or the acquisition subsystem) can be staged into the EGI storages, and be managed using LFC File Catalogue and AMGA Metadata Catalogue. At the front end, an EISCAT science gateway can be established, seen as part of a community support subsystem, to provide access control (e.g., authentication, authorisation, and single sign-on) and application portals (e.g., to which processing and data-mining applications from EISCAT 3D can be plugged in). Using the Reference Model, functional elements of both EISCAT 3D and EGI can be placed 
into a uniform framework, which provides a way of thinking about the construction of the 
integrated infrastructure. 

. Evaluation of the Feasibilities of the EGI Infrastructures and Services in 
Supporting EISCAT 3D Requirements 


Using the common framework enabled by the Reference Model, we can analyse and 
compare the EGI generic service infrastructure and the requirements from a domain-specific 
data infrastructure such as EISCAT 3D, and we understand that there are significant gaps in-
between, including but not limited to: 

. Staging services to ship scientific data from observatory networks into the EGI generic 
service infrastructure (and to get the data off) are missing. Such a staging service should 
be able to transmit both big chunk of data (up to petabyte) and continuing updates/real-
time data streams during operations. Such a service should satisfy performance 
requirements, including: 
o Robust. Environmental scientific research needs high quality data. In particularly, 
during important natural events, losing observation data is unaffordable. Fault-
tolerance is desirable, which requests the transmission service can be self-
recover from the interruption point without restarting the whole transmission 
process. 
o Fast, e.g., in the case of EISCAT 3D, the 10PB ring-buffer can only hold data for 
about 3 days, and the big observation data need to be transferred to the archive 
storage fast enough to avoid being overwritten. 
o Cheap, e.g., the observatory networks are remote from the EGI computing farm. 
Using high-capacity pipes are possible but expensive. Software solutions such as, 
intelligent network protocols, optimisation, data compression, are desirable. 


. Cost effective large storage facilities and long-term archiving mechanisms are 
urgently needed. Environmental data, in particular for climate research, need to be 
preserved over the long-term to be useful. Being Grid-oriented, EGI is not designed for 
data archiving purposes. Although large storage capabilities are potentially available 
through NGI participants, EGI does not guarantee long-term persistent data preservation. 
Curation services such as advanced data identification, cataloguing and replication are 
absent from the EGI service list. 
. The EGI infrastructure needs to adapt in order to handle emerging big- data 
phenomena. The challenge is how to integrate what is new with what already exists. 
Services such as job schedulers need to be redesigned to take into account the trade-off 
of moving big data; intelligent data partitioning services should be investigated as a way 
to improve the performance of big data processing. 
. Advanced searching and data discovery facilities are urgently needed. It is often said 
that data volume, velocity, and variety define big data, but the unique characteristic of big 
data is the manner in which the value is discovered (Oracle 2012). Unlike conventional 
analysis approaches where the simple summing of a known value reveals a result, big 
data analytics and the science behind them filter low value or low-density data to reveal 
high value or high-density data (Oracle 2012). Novel approaches are needed to discover 
meaningful insights through deep, complex search, e.g., using machine learning, 



statistical modelling, and graph algorithms. Without facilities to unlock the value of big 
data, expensively generated and archived scientific data will be useless. 
. Community support services are insufficient. The big data phenomena will eventually 
lead to a new data-centric way of conceptualising, organising and carrying out research 
activities that could lead to an introduction of new approach to conducting science. A new 
generation of data scientists is emerging with new requirements. Service facilities should 
be planned to support their needs. 


 

Currently, EUDAT has taken up the role to implement a collaborative data infrastructure, 
however only a few services are available, storage facilities are insufficient, and policies for 
usage are unclear. Among our current investigations, we are investigating the possibility of 
integrating EUDAT services into EGI infrastructure, seen as a layer on top of the EGI 
federated computing facility. The analysis of the EUDAT services is included in another 
usage example (see Example 2 below) of the Reference Model. 



In this example, we have shown that the Reference Model could be used to conduct various 
system analysis tasks. Using the Reference Model we have: 

. Clarified the boundary of the EISCAT 3D data infrastructure and identified the missing 
functionalities in the design; 
. Provided a solution to integrate the EGI services into EISCAT 3D data infrastructure; 
. Identified gaps between the EGI generic service infrastructure with the requirements 
from the domain specific research infrastructure, EISCAT 3D. 


 

We have shown that the Reference Model offered a research infrastructure: 

. A knowledge base containing useful information could be referred in various system 
analysis and design activities; 
. A uniform platform into which computational elements of different infrastructures 
could be fitted, enabling comparison and analysis; 
. A way of thinking of constructions of plausible system architectures. 


 

In the next, we will explain a different way of using the Reference Model in the analysis of the 
EUDAT services. 

3.2 Example 2: Using the Reference Model as An Analysis Tool 

3.2.1 Descriptions of the Example 

This study case provide an example for ESFRI Environmental Research Infrastructures 
project managers and architects to use the ENVRI Reference Model as an analysis tool to 
review an emerging technology, the EUDAT data infrastructure and its service components. 
Such an analysis can help them better understand the newly developed technologies and 
decide on how to make use of the generic services provided in their own research 
infrastructures. 


The EU-funded EUDAT project14 is developing a pan-European data infrastructure 
supporting multiple research communities. Such a generic data infrastructure is seen as a 
layer in the overall European scientific e-infrastructure to complement the computing layer 
(EGI, DEISA15, PRACE16) and the networking layer (GEANT17). 


The design activities of EUDAT are driven by use-case-based community requirements 
EUDAT reviews the approaches and requirements of different communities, such as 
linguistics (CLARIN18), solid earth sciences (EPOS19), climate sciences (ENES20), 
environmental sciences (LIFEWATCH21), and biological and medical sciences (VPH22), 
identifying common services, and provides computational solutions. Initially, 4 services are 
provided within EUDAT data infrastructure: 

. Safe replication: which enables communities to replicate datasets -- using the integrated 
Rule-Oriented Data System (iRODS23) as a replication middleware -- within data centre 
sites, with persistent identifiers automatically assigned to the digital objects in order to 
keep track of all the replicas; 
. Data staging: which enables easy movement of large amounts of data between EUDAT 
storage resources and workspace areas on high-performance computing (HPC) systems 
to be further processed. 
. Metadata Catalogue: which allows researchers to easily access metadata of data (or 
their collections) stored in EUDAT nodes. EUDAT will also harvest external metadata 
(which contains pointers to actual data) from stable metadata providers to create a 
comprehensive joint catalogue that will help researchers to find interesting data objects 
and collections. 
. Simple Storage: which allows registered users to upload Òlong tailÓ data objects (large in 
number but small in size), and share such objects with other researchers. 


We use the concepts developed in the ENVRI Reference Model to analyse the EUDAT data 
infrastructure and its service components. Only cursory analysis is provided, since the main 
purpose of the study case is to illustrate the usage of the ENVRI Reference model. 



The ENVRI Reference Model models an archetypical environmental research infrastructure 
(RI). As a service infrastructure, EUDAT itself is therefore not an implementation of the 


Reference Model, but is rather a source of implementations for instances of objects required 
by any RI implementing the Model. 


 

From the computational perspective, EUDAT offers services that can be used to instantiate 
various objects in the Reference Model. For example EUDATÕs Safe Replication facilities can 
implement various required services within the Data Curation subsystem of an 
environmental RI: (grey lightbulb)
(grey lightbulb)


. Acquisition: EUDAT does not offer facilities for data acquisition, relying on data 
already gathered by client RIs. (lightbulb)
(lightbulb)
. Curation: EUDAT can provide instances of any of the computational objects used for 
data curation (including data store controllers, data transfer services and 
catalogue services) either in place of or complementary to instances provided by an 
environmental RI Ð the extent to which EUDAT assumes the curation role for an 
infrastructure will vary from case-to-case. (grey lightbulb)
(grey lightbulb)
(grey lightbulb)
(grey lightbulb)
. Access: Data access to EUDAT curated data is brokered by EUDAT, whilst the RI 
would broker RI-curated data. In practice the RI broker would sit in front of the EUDAT 
broker, forwarding data requests that involve data delegated to EUDAT. (grey lightbulb)
(lightbulb)
. Processing: EUDAT do not offer data processing (beyond metadata annotation) as a 
core service; workflow enactment is being investigated as a future service however, 
which would allow a later version of the EUDAT platform to implement elements of a 
Data Processing subsystem. (grey lightbulb)
(lightbulb)
. Whilst certain aspects of EUDAT such as the Simple Store for researchers might be 
directly accessible as an independent gateway service, in general EUDAT sits behind 
a client RI, its services hidden behind the RIÕs native services from the perspective of the 
RIÕs user community. It would be likely however that the Ôvirtual laboratoriesÕ by which 
community groups interact with an RI would be in some way augmented by EUDAT 
services; in particular, implementations of the security service would integrate the 
EUDAT AAI service to allow seamless integration of EUDAT-held datasets with locally-
held RI datasets. (lightbulb)
(lightbulb)


 

The most immediately apparent conclusion that can be drawn from cursory analysis of 
EUDAT services in the context of the Reference Model is that EUDAT can potentially 
implement the entire Data Curation subsystem of an environmental RI; however in 
practice, one would expect that an RI would retain a certain amount of data locally 
(particularly raw data that is expensive to transfer off-site), necessitating a more nuanced (grey lightbulb)



division of labour between the RI and EUDAT. In particular, EUDAT provides replication 
services, allowing the co-existence of RI and EUDAT data stores holding the same data, and 
EUDAT provides metadata (including global persistent identifier) services, allowing EUDAT 
to provide a catalogue service (probably complementary to any catalogue service 
maintained by an environmental RI itself). The delegation of services will be a product of 
negotiation between the environmental RI and the EUDAT project (some degree of 
automation may be possible, but likely sufficient for only smaller projects). (grey lightbulb)




The principal potential benefit of using the Reference Model in general is the ability to 
precisely identify components required by an environmental RI and then identify how (if at all) 
the RI implements those components. In the EUDAT context, EUDAT provides a number of 
services that implement certain components (primarily in Data Curation); it should therefore 
be possible to identify the equivalent services in a modelled RI and determine whether or not 
there is a benefit to delegating those services to EUDAT. This decision may be based on 
cost (particularly related to economies of scale) and development time (in cases where the 
RI has not yet implemented the service, but may be able to use the EUDAT service instead). (grey lightbulb)



Researchers and architects of an ESFRI Environmental Research Infrastructure often 
encounter requests to describe their infrastructure, to introduce its particular architectural 
features, or to explain system requirements. The Reference Model offers a set of ready-to-
use terminology with explicit definitions, which can be applied to various documentations. 
This example tells how the Reference Model has been used as a common language in 
writings to communicate with a community other than environmental science. 

 

The Research Data Alliance (RDA)24 community is established to accelerate international 
data-driven innovation and discovery by facilitating research data sharing and exchange, use and re-use, standards harmonization, and discoverability. This will be achieved through the development and adoption of infrastructure, policy, practice, standards, and other deliverables. 


ENVRI has been actively supporting the RDA activities and made various contributions. In 
particular, ENVRI has been accepted as one of the use cases by the RDA Data Foundation 
and Terminology (DFT) working group, which has been set up to gather emerging 
requirements as well as to test research outcomes. 

 

In preparing the use case, researchers and architects from two ENVRI-participating research 
infrastructures, EMSO and EPOS, used the terms and concepts defined in the Reference 
Model to describe architectural features of their research infrastructures. The resulting 
document from EMSO is presented below. 


The European research infrastructure EMSO is a European network of fixed-point, deep-
seafloor and water column observatories deployed in key sites of the European Continental 
margin and Arctic. It aims to provide the technological and scientific framework for the 
investigation of the environmental processes related to the interaction between the 
geosphere, biosphere, and hydrosphere and for a sustainable management by long-term 
monitoring also with real-time data transmission. Since 2006, EMSO has been on the ESFRI 
(European Strategy Forum on Research Infrastructures) roadmap; it entered its construction 
phase in 2012. Within this framework, EMSO is contributing to large infrastructure integration projects such as ENVRI and COOPEUS. The EMSO infrastructure is geographically 
distributed in key sites of European waters, spanning from the Arctic, through the Atlantic and Mediterranean Sea to the Black Sea. It is presently consisting of thirteen sites that have been identified by the scientific community according to their importance respect to Marine Ecosystems, Climate Changes and Marine GeoHazards. 

 

The data infrastructure for EMSO is being designed as a distributed system. Presently, 
EMSO data collected during experiments at each EMSO site are locally stored and 
organized in catalogues or relational databases run by the responsible regional EMSO 
nodes. The EMSO data architecture is currently adapted to the ENVRI Reference Model. As 
shown in Figure 3.4, according to the ENVRI-RM it includes the 4 ENVRI common 
subsystems. Concepts and terms defined in ENVRI-RM are used to illustrate the currently 
practiced common data management strategies for real time as well as archived data within 
the EMSO distributed data management system. 

 

 
The EMSO data acquisition sub-system collects raw data from EMSOÕs marine 
observatories, which represent sensor arrays of varying geometry and various instruments or human observers, and brings the measures (data streams) into the system. Set-up and 
design of each observatory is specified depending on the scientific demands and includes 
specification of sampling designs and measuring method. (grey lightbulb)


 

Depending on the deployment situation and nature of collected data, EMSO data is acquired 
in real-time or delayed mode. Both data collection methods are performed by the regional 
nodes of EMSO that are responsible for the operation of marine observatories. Marine 
observatories have to deal with many technological challenges due to their extreme, deep 
sea deployment locations. Therefore data acquired by marine observatory sensor systems is 
most often temporarily staged within the instruments or the observatoryÕs internal storage 
systems, and real-time transmission of data is only provided by observatories that are 
connected by submarine cables or permanent satellite connections. Whereas real time data 
are immediately available, the staged data becomes available for these systems only after 
visits during dedicated ship expeditions when the instruments are recovered or maintained. 
In addition, data are acquired through laboratory studies performed on material or samples 
collected at marine observatory sites such as multidisciplinary analyses of water samples, 
sediment cores, tow or trap catches.


 

Depending on the instrumentation and observatory design, on-site quality control and data 
filtering is applied, generally followed by a transformation process which converts the 
instrument specific data format into a transmission format required by EMSOÕs data 
curation and data processing systems at the regional data centre nodes. The data 
collected by the data acquisition sub-system are transmitted to the data curation sub-
system to be maintained and archived there. 




The EMSO data curation sub-system facilitates data curation, quality control and 
preservation of scientific data. It is operated at the data centres responsible for archiving the data acquired by the EMSO regional nodes. Three major data centres are currently offering these services for EMSO data: UniHB (PANGAEA), INGV (MOIST) and IFREMER 
(EUROSITES). 


 

 Data import services are provided by these institutions which either transfer the above 
mentioned data transmission format into an archival format or provide editorial tools and 
interfaces to ingest delayed mode data and laboratory analysis into their systems. Data 
which are intended to be transferred to the regional nodes data archives are quality checked, 
linked with an appropriate set of metadata according to international standards and 
persistently identified, depending on the archives internal standards and procedures. EMSO 
offers catalogue services and metadata export services for each regional node. The 
node systems PANGAEA and MOIST services based on metadata standards such as 
ISO19115, GCMD-DIF and extended Dublin Core, for EUROSITES data, metadata is 
extracted from NetCDF files via a central EMSO service. Data export services are not yet 
fully implemented at all EMSO nodes, however it is planned to provide NetCDF export 
services for each node. The regional archives are responsible for cataloguing and long-term 



The EMSO data access sub-system enables discovery and retrieval of data housed in 
data resources managed by a data curation sub-system. EMSO offers data discovery via 
a common metadata catalogue and web portal25. The portal is based on the brokerage 
system panFMP26 and uses Open Archives Initiative Protocol for Metadata Harvesting (OAI-
PMH) or simple file transfer via FTP/HTTP to harvest metadata from EMSOÕs distributed 
regional node data archives and their archival systems PANGAEA, MOIST and 
EUROSITES. 

 

The EMSO data portal offers machine-human as well as machine-machine search facilities 
and discovery services based on the collected metadata. This includes a simple web-
based user interface, a data search engine offered at the EMSO data portal in a Google-like 
style. In addition the data portal offers a common discovery service following the 
OpenSearch specification including the OpenSearch-Geo extension. An Open Geospatial 
Consortium (OGC) Catalogue Service for Web (CS-W) interface is currently under 
development. 

 

A centralized data export service for these archived data is not implemented or planned, 
therefore, unless each EMSO data archive offers its own NetCDF data transformation 
service (see above) data requests are not yet processed by the EMSO data portal but are 
redirected to the hosting data archives which provide their own data access services for data retrieval. 

 

Access to real time data is also offered via the EMSO data portal. EMSO has chosen to 
implement core standards of the OGC Sensor Web Enablement (SWE) suite of standards, 
such as Sensor Observation Service (SOS) and Observations and Measurements (O&M) to 
deliver real time data. These interfaces and formats are used to offer a common, web based 
SOS client that provides interactive visualizations of real time data. 



Centralized data processing sub-systems that aggregate the data from various 
resources and provides computational capabilities and capacities for conducting data 
analysis and scientific experiments are not yet implemented for EMSO. Once more regional 
EMSO nodes and their data archives support NetCDF data export, it has been envisaged to 
introduce data visualization and plotting services at the EMSO data portal following the 
ESONET example. However presently, data processing services such as visualization, 
mining, as well as statistical services, are exclusively provided by each regional node and its responsible data centre. 

Centralized community support sub-system services to manage, control and 
track users' activities and supports users to conduct their roles in communities are not yet implemented or planned for EMSO.



The EMSO example demonstrates how to use the common language defined by the 
Reference Model in documentation to communicate with the RDA community. 

 

It has been recognised there is a common challenge when communicating with external 
organisations or communities -- Òyour 'model' is not my 'model', your 'data' is not my '


With a public accessible reference base, an external community that has little domain 
knowledge, such as RDA, is able to understand the specific descriptions of EMSO by looking 
up the terminology in the Reference Model. In a way, using the Reference Model, the 
communication efficiency can be improved. 

 

The ENVRI Reference Model provides a set of ready-to-use terminology, in principle: 

. Terms in the Science Viewpoint can be used for describing requirements, use scenarios, 
and human activities; 
. Terms in the Information Viewpoint for describing information objects handled in a 
system, their action types, constrains, states, and lifecycles; and 
. Terms in the Computational Viewpoint for describing functionalities, computational 
components, interfaces and services. 


 

A reader may have noticed there are some terms in the writing that are different from the 
ones linked back in the Reference Model. For example, ÒSet-up (É of each observatory)Ó is 
linked to ÒInstrument ConfigurationÓ. The intention is to show that in practice, to pursue the fitness, significance or beauty of the writing, an author may use different vocabularies to express a single concept. However, one can link them to the related concepts and definitions 
in the Reference Model to indicate the precise meanings. In this sense, using the Reference Model is different from using a dictionary Ð referring to the Reference Model places more emphasis on conceptual relativity. 

Although it looks similar, this example provides a difference perspective on the usage of the Reference Model to that of Example 3. 

 

The ENVRI Reference Model is characterised by being both an ontology and a model. While 
Example 3 demonstrates how to make use of its ontological framework in documentation, in 
this example, we exploit its representation as a model, which enables structural thinking and is more useful in the construction of an infrastructure and the organisation of design 
activities. 

 


The European Plate Observing System (EPOS) is the European integrated solid earth 
sciences research infrastructure; a long-term plan to integrate existing national research 
infrastructures for seismology, volcanology, geodesy and other solid earth sciences. One of EPOS' goals is to provide the technical and legal framework by which to automate discovery and access to datasets and services provided by existing national (and trans-national) research institutions and monitoring networks throughout Europe. Another goal is to provide a standard set of core services by which researchers and other interested parties can interact with the federated infrastructure independently of the any particular data centre or national infrastructure. By providing such a common service interface and federation of resources, EPOS will be able to provide greater access to data recorded by existing and future monitoring networks, laboratory experiments and computational simulations, and foster greater cross-disciplinary research collaborations. 

 

EPOS was included in the European Strategy Forum on Research Infrastructures (ESFRI) 
Roadmap in December 2008 and is currently in its Preparatory Phase; EPOS is scheduled to 
enter its Construction and Operational Phase in 2015. 

 

EPOS is an infrastructure that intends to integrate several existing infrastructures that in the past have generally been constructed on a national scale only. There already exist 
established data centres with established working practices and monitoring networks. The 
challenge for EPOS is to provide a lightweight service layer that can be placed over these 
existing established infrastructures whilst disguising the underlying heterogeneity of 
components; this challenge is at least partially mitigated by the existence of certain protocols 
and data formats that are already standard in some parts of (for example) seismology, and a general drive within EPOS to further extend standardisation throughout its constituent 
institutions Ð though it is not clear how extensively this level of standardisation will apply to all of the (currently highly disparate) earth sciences covered by EPOS' remit. 

 

It is intended that ENVRI contribute in some way to the design of the EPOS Core Services, 
whether by the production of useful tools (via ENVRI WP4) or by the application of the 
ENVRI Reference Model (ENVRI-RM) for infrastructure layout and design (via ENVRI WP3). 
Focusing on the latter, ENVRI-RM should be able to simplify the design problem by breaking 
it down into well-defined subsystems of components specified from different complementary 
viewpoints 

Following the guidance of the ENVRI common subsystems the EPSO design issues can 
be broken down as follows: (grey lightbulb)



Data acquisition is performed by EPOS' constituent 'client' infrastructures; existing monitoring networks and laboratories, collected by data centres and presented for discovery and access to the EPOS integration layer. Many of these client systems operate in real-time (for example the continuous data streams produced by seismograph networks), requiring concurrently active data curation facilities (storage, persistent identification and metadata assignment). 

 

Data is principally curated within existing data centres that publish their datasets according to some agreed protocol. These data centres have their own data collection policies, but EPOS 
intends to promote the adoption of common metadata in order to ease interoperation, based 
on a three-level model consisting of discovery metadata (using extended qualified Dublin 
Core) which is derived from contextual metadata (using CERIF, the Common European 
Research Information Format), which points to detailed metadata (domain-specific and 
associated with a particular service or resource). EPOS will also provide a global persistent identification mechanism for continuous data streams and discrete datasets (the latter possibly using the mechanisms produced by the EUDAT project). 


 Given global persistent identification and metadata, as well as the use where possible of 
standard data formats, it is intended that tools be produced to search over and extract 
specific datasets from different sites based on geospatial (and other) requirements. This 
along with tools for modelling, processing, data mining and visualisation form the data-
oriented integration layer of the EPOS Core Services. These sit atop the 'thematic layer' of the Services, which divide services by domain and forms (for example seismology, 
volcanology and geodesy as well as satellite data, hazard maps, geomagnetic observatories 
and rock physics laboratories). 

 

Because EPOS is making a concerted effort to integrate data standards and services, the 
resultant infrastructure should be less reliant on the brokering model than otherwise 
expected; the homogenisation of resources means that it will not be so necessary to maintain interfaces between heterogeneous resources required to be interoperable. 

 

EPOS also intends to provide access for researchers to high-performance computation 
facilities as provided by such infrastructure projects as PRACE. 


EPOS intends to provide training facilities to its research demographic; it is as yet unclear if EPOS intends to provide any kind of 'social' aspect to its core services (annotation of datasets, record of individual researchers' interactions with the infrastructure, etc.). It is a goal however of EPOS to promote best practices and reward participation, as well as to increase the visibility of research results produced using EPOS services. This implies that community support will become an increasingly important aspect of the EPOS infrastructure as the basic integration challenge it faces becomes solved. 


Like EPOS, ESFRI Environmental Research Infrastructures are characterised as large-scale 
distributed complex systems involving numbers of organisations across different European 
countries. Design and implementations become large collaborative activities subjective to 
change and are evolving, which bring significant challenges. Considering the difficulty of 
ensuring efficiency and productivity, it is not only what to do but how to do it that is important. 
We observe no efficient approach is currently in use to assist the organisation of the design activities. 

 


The ENVRI Reference Model captures common requirements of a collection of 
representative environmental research infrastructures, providing a projection of Europe-wide requirements they have, which in potential can be served as a technology roadmap to 
position and orchestrate collaborations in design and developments. It provides well-defined subsystems of components specified from different complementary viewpoints (Science, Information and Computation), which can help break down the complexity and simplify the design problems, enabling designers to deliver a practical architecture that leads to concrete implementations. It offers a descriptive framework for specifying uniform distributed systems, allowing designers from different organisations to carry out design activities in parallel. 

ENVRI working package 4 responses to deliver common services to support the 
constructions of ESFRI ENV RIs. Initially, the implementations focus on a data access 
subsystem that supports integrated data discovery and access. In order to help ESFRI 
project managers, architects, and developers understand the design and implementation of 
these services, this example uses the terms and concepts from the Reference Model to 
explain the technology details of these services. (grey lightbulb)


We start with the semantic harmonisation service developed by the team in Task 4.2 
(Tarasova, 2013). The development is conducted to support the use case "Iceland Volcano 
Ash"27. The goal is to support scientists to analyse Iceland behaviour using data provided by different research infrastructures during a specific time period. 


Defined by the Reference Model Science Viewpoint, the semantic harmonization is a 
behaviour belong to the data publication community, which captures the business 
requirements of unifying similar data (knowledge) models based on the consensus of 
collaborative domain experts to achieve better data (knowledge) reuse and semantic 
interoperability.

A data publication community interacts with a data access subsystem to conduct user 
roles. The computational specification of the data access subsystem is given

The model specifies a data access subsystem which provides data broker that act as 
intermediaries for access to data held within the data curation subsystem, as well as 
semantic brokers for performing semantic interpretation. These brokers are responsible for 
verifying the agents making access requests and for validating those requests prior to 
sending them on to the relevant data curation service. These brokers can be interacted with directly via virtual laboratories such as experiment laboratories (for general interaction 



with data and processing services) and semantic laboratories (by which the community 
can update semantic models associated with the research infrastructure). (lightbulb)


 

 
A data broker object intercedes between the data access subsystem and the data 
curation subsystem, collecting the computational functions required to negotiate data transfer 
and query requests directed at data curation services on behalf of some user. It is the 
responsibility of the data broker to validate all requests and to verify the identity and access 
privileges of agents making requests. It is not permitted for an outside agency or service to 
access the data stores within a research infrastructure by any means other than via a data 
broker.


An experiment laboratory is created by a science gateway in order to allow researchers 
to interact with data held by a research infrastructure in order to achieve some scientific 
output. (grey lightbulb)


A semantic broker intercedes where queries within one semantic domain need to be 
translated into another to be able to interact with curated data. It also collects the 
functionality required to update the semantic models used by an infrastructure to describe 
data held within. (grey lightbulb)


A semantic laboratory is created by a science gateway in order to allow researchers to 
provide input on the interpretation of data gathered by a research infrastructure. (grey lightbulb)


 

Please click the links to find out the specification details of these computational objects and 
the interactions between them. 

 

The implementation conducted by WP4 T4.2 is an instantiation of the above computational 
objects specified in the Reference Model, that uses existing software components and 
developed approaches to enable integration and harmonization of data resources from 
clusterÕs infrastructures and publication according unifying views. 

 


 

The prototyped service uses two semantic models to provide mapping between 
representations: the RDF Data Cube vocabulary29 and the ENVRI vocabulary30. The ENVRI 
vocabulary is derived from the OGC and ISO ÒObservations & MeasurementsÓ standard 
(O&M)31 , SWEET32 and GeoSparql Vocabulary33. 

 

Table 3.3 provides the mapping between Reference Model computational objects and the 
deployed service components. Among them, the Transformation component serves as a 
data broker to negotiate data access with data stores within heterogeneous research 
infrastructures. An (instance of the) semantic broker is implemented using the RDF store 
technology which provides the semantic mappings and translations. 

 

In the following, we explain the design of the information model of the semantic 
harmonisation service. 

 

Analysing the environmental data schema results in identifying the common structural 
concepts, the ENVRI vocabulary, which include the terms such as Òmetadata attributesÓ, 
ÒobservationÓ, ÒdatasetÓ. Data retrieved from the different sources are firstly mapped to this uniform semantic model. Figure 3.7 gives two examples, and shows how datasets of ICOS 
and EURO-Argo can be mapped to the ENVRI vocabulary, respectively. 

 

 

Semantic mappings are based on observation statements. For example, the following 
observation statement declares the measurements about ÒairÓ: 

 ÒObservation of the CO2 concentration in samples of air at the Mace Head atmospheric 
station which is located at (53_20'N, 9_54'W): CO2 concentration of the air 25m above the 
sea level on Jan 1st, 2010 at 00:00 was 391.318 parts per million". 

Air is represented as the concept of air in GEneral Multi-lingual Environmental Thesaurus 
(GEMET) by assigning the URI34 to it (entity naming). The GEMET concept of air is then 
defined as an instance of envri:FeatureOfInterest (entity typing). 


 

The mapping rules are specified by using the Data cube plug-in for Google Refine. The 
mappings are executed to obtain RDF representations of the source data files. As such they 
are uploaded to the Virtuoso OSE RDF store35 and are ready to be queried at a SPARQL-
endpoint. 

The data harmonization process described above is captured by the Reference Model. As 
shown in Figure 3.8, the Information Viewpoint models the mapping of data according to 
mapping rules which are defined by the use of local and global conceptual 
model. Ontologies and thesauri are defined as conceptual models, and those widely 
accepted models such as, GEMET, O&M, Data Cube, are declared global conceptual 
models whereas the ENVRI vocabulary is specified as a local one, because it has been 
developed within the current project without being yet accepted by a broad community. 
 

Describing a process using the ENVRI Reference Model concepts is to instantiate the 
concepts that can be mapped to the process. Figure 3.9 illustrates the instantiation (all boxes with a dashed line) of the ENVRI Reference Model information model concepts focusing at 
the harmonization process described above. The same could be demonstrated for the 
EURO-Argo dataset with the feature of interest being ocean. For each part of the observation mapping rules have to be defined to be able to query both datasets at a certain time period. 


 

 
Table 3.4 and 3.5 show the mapping between the harmonisation process and the concepts in 
the ENVRI RM information viewpoint. The example shows that both bottom up (from the 
applied operation to the model description) and top down approaches (from the model 
definitions back to the applied solution) can lead to a better understanding of the Reference 
Model itself and of how components should work properly in a complex infrastructure. 

 


For example: ÒObservation of the CO2 concentration 
in samples of air at the Mace Head atmospheric 
station which is located at (53_20'N, 9_54'W): 
CO2 concentration of the air 25m above the sea level 
on Jan 1st, 2010 at 00:00 was 391.318 parts per 
millionÓ 


This example demonstrate the feasibility of the design specifications of the reference model. 
Instances of selected model components can be developed into common services, in this 
case, a data access subsystem is implemented that supports integrated data discovery 
and access. Data products from different environmental research infrastructures, initially 
including ICOS and EURO-Argo, can now be pulled out through a single data access 
interface37. Scientists are using this newly-available data resource to study environmental 
problems previously unachievable including, the study of the climate impact caused by the 
eruptions of the Eyjafjallajkull volcano in 2010. (grey lightbulb)


In this guideline, we have used a set of practical examples to illustrate various ways of using 
the ENVRI Reference Model. We have chosen scenarios familiar to the ESFRI 
Environmental Research Infrastructures community, and provided analysis that may be of 
interest and benefit to their daily work. Throughout the document, we have incrementally 
introduced model concepts and terminology and guided the reader to explore 90% of the 
most important contents described by the Reference Model. 

 

Using a number of examples, we have shown that by using the Reference Model, a ESFRI 
Environmental Research Infrastructure could benefit from: 

. A set of ready-to-use terminology with a publicly-accessible reference base, which 
can be used to describe requirements and architectural features of an infrastructure, and 
serve as a common language in communication materials; in particular, with an external 
community without any specific knowledge of the scientific domain being addressed. 
. A uniform framework with well-defined subsystems of components specified from 
different complementary viewpoints (Science, Information and Computation), which 
promotes structural thinking in constructions of system architectures, and can be used as 
a research tool for comparison and analysis of heterogeneous infrastructures. 
. A knowledge base capturing existing requirements and state-of-the-art design 
experiences. The information provided can be referred to in various system analysis 
tasks, to guide design and implementation activities, and to drive the development of 
common services. 


 

When future resources become available, we will conduct more investigations, including: 

. We will assist our users to get hand on the Reference Model and exploit new ways of 
using it. We will continue the investigation of the big data pilot project with EISCAT 3D 
and report back new discoveries. We have also received the requests from ICOS, and 
we will help ICOS to apply the model concepts to their daily tasks, e.g., in various system 
analysis and design tasks, or to guide implementations. In a similar way, we will interact 
with other ESFRI ENV RIs. In particular, we are interested in how to use the Reference 
Model framework to improve the interoperability among the heterogeneous 
infrastructures. 
. We will assist the development of the common services. A more detailed guide of how to 
use the Reference Model to drive the implementations (in WP4) will be provided. 
. We will use the Reference Model to bridge ESFRI ENV RIs with external communities 
(such as, RDA), projects (such as, GEOSS, DataOne, EUDAT and EGI), and standards 
(such as, INSPIRE, OGC, and the Digital Library Reference Model). These will provide 
ESFRI ENV RIs an overview of related technologies, and possible solutions for the 
integrations. 
. We also have a plan to experiment with the Reference Model as a guide to train the next 
generation data scientists. 


